---
title: "Writing Effective AI Prompts"
teaching: 20 # teaching time in minutes
exercises: 2 # exercise time in minutes
---

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: objectives

- 
-

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: questions

- FIXME

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Starting A Conversation

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  callout
### An Unpredictable World

Most computer programs are *deterministic*. Given the same input, they 
will always produce the same output. So in most software lessons, you can expect the same result when you type along with the instructor.

Generative AI is not deterministic, it is *probabilistic*, so can produce different results from the same input.

As a result, this class will depend on *you* and your interaction with your LLM of choice. The instructor can guide and direct you, but the experience is not "right or wrong".

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

Imagine that you are an early career researcher. 
You have spent several months carefully collecting data. 
But you are now under deadline pressure to analyse the data and produce figures for your next paper. 
You need to write a script to load the dataset, calculate some statistics and produce visualisations, but you have no idea how to proceed. 

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::  challenge

## Exercise

Open a LLM chat window in your web browser, type in and submit the prompt:

`Teach me to code`

Look at the output generated by the LLM and reflect on the questions:

1. Is the response meaningful and useful?
1. Does the response suggest leanring paths for the language you want to learn?
1. Can you identify what you would need to learn to solve your specific data analysis problem?

:::::::::::::::  solution

## Solution

Many LLMs produce comprehensive and helpful answers to this prompt. However the responses are very general. At the time of writing, Microsoft Copilot, for example, proposes a 7 month curriculum for learning data science. It also proposes learning paths specifically for Python and Javascript. If you are interested in R or other data science languages, this might not be the most helpful approach.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

### Some More Precision

LLMs are trained on a large variety of texts, and can produce an endless array of possible responses to prompts. In order to generate the most useful response, we need to submit as clear and expressive a prompt as possible. The previous prompt had promising output, but was too general. Let's try something more specific:

**TODO: Python vs R alternatives** 
```{prompt}
I need to write a script in python to load data, generate statistics and produce figures. What skills do I need to learn to achieve this?
```

**TODO: Consider *very* different response structures from different LLMs.**